docs: a/b testing doc V2 (#8501)
Unleash/unleash: website/docs/feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/a-b-testing.md

---
title: How to do A/B Testing
title: A/B Testing using Feature Flags
slug: /feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/a-b-testing
---

> ## What is A/B Testing?

Author: @michaelferranti I've made additional updates here based off of Justin's suggestion that we remove "what is [x]?" intros because our UPP will know exactly what these topics are and we can jump right into how we approach the topic sooner.

[Strategy variants](/reference/strategy-variants) let you expose a particular version of a feature to select user bases when a flag is enabled. You can then collect data to determine which variant performs better, which we'll cover later in this tutorial.

Using strategy variants in your activation strategy is the canonical way to run A/B tests with Unleash and your application.

![This diagram breaks down how strategy variants sit on top activation strategies for flags in Unleash.](/img/tutorial-building-blocks-strategy-variants.png)

A variant has four components that define it:

-   a name: This must be unique among the strategy's variants. You typically use the name to identify the variant in your client.
-   a weight: The [variant weight](/reference/strategy-variants#variant-weight) is the likelihood of any one user getting this specific variant.
-   an optional payload: A variant can also have an associated [payload](/reference/strategy-variants#variant-payload) to deliver more data or context.

> -   a value: This describes the purpose of the variant. For example, "Most Read" or "Most Popular".

Reviewer: I don't think this is correct. Also, the value is not really the property of the variant, but it's a property of the payload. so the optional payload has a type and value

Reviewer: the value is the actual payload

Reviewer: So this would be an example:

payload type: json
payload value: 
```
{
"color": "blue",
"position: 1
}
```

Author: I see! It's the _entire_ payload. It seemed like a parameter of the payload not the whole thing, based on the Unleash admin UI

Reviewer: Yes the payload 'entity' has a type, and a value, where the value is the actual payload you want to be sent back in the response. But at the moment the above docs say that value or a property of the variant

In some cases like in Example 1, you may want to use the "disabled feature" state as the "Control group".

Alternatively, in Example 2, you can expose the feature to 100% of users and use two variants: "Control" and "Test". In either case, the variants are always used for the "Test" group. The difference is determined by how you use the "Control" group.

An advantage of having your feature disabled for the Control group is that you can use metrics to see how many of the users are exposed to experiment(s) in comparison to the ones that are not. If you use only variants (for both the test and control group), you may see the feature metric as 100% exposed and would have to look deeper into the variant to know how many were exposed.

Here is an example of a payload that is returned from Google Analytics that includes impression event data:

```js
{
    "client_id": "unleash_client"
    "user_id": "uuid1234"
    "timestamp_micros": "1730407349525000"
    "non_personalized_ads": true
    "events": [
        {
            "name":"select_item"
            "params": {
                "items":[]
                "event":"screen_view"
                "app_name":"myAppName"

>                 "feature":"myFeatureName"

Reviewer 2: I still have a question about how you would account for a variant having multiple flags at the same time. Like if I have  a multivariate test that looks at a new version of the a. Nav, b. signup form and c. Marketing copy. Each of these flags could on/off, so there are 9 total variants. how is this accounted for?

Author: @kwasniew helped me with breaking down the way we'd do it in unleash for multivariate tests:

"Usually each flag can have multiple variants so the relationship is the opposite. If we are talking multivariate testing I think you’d rather have a flag for nav, a flag for sign up form and a flag for marketing copy. Each of those flags would have as many variants as required by each feature. And you’d always record what combination you got for a given user context and send it to the analytics platform and how it converted."

---
title: Effective A/B Testing
slug: /feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/a-b-testing
---

## What is A/B Testing?

> **A/B testing** is a randomized controlled experiment where you test two or more versions of a feature to see which version performs better. If you have more than two versions, it's known as **A/B/n testing**. Coupled with analytics, A/B testing enables you to better understand your users and how to serve them better.

Reviewer: Let's keep the bold formatting for UI elements

**Multivariate testing** is used to test multiple variables simultaneously in order to determine the optimal combination of elements that will produce the best results. Different combinations of variables such as design, content and functionality can be tested to measure which combination has the greatest impact on user behavior or conversion rates.

Feature flags are a great way to run A/B tests with minimal code modifications, and Unleash offers built-in features that make it easy to get started. In this tutorial, we will walk through how to do an A/B test using Unleash with your application.

## How to Perform A/B Testing with Unleash

To follow along with this tutorial, you will need access to an Unleash Instance. Head over to our [Quick Start documentation](/quickstart) for options, including running locally, or using an [Unleash SaaS instance](https://www.getunleash.io/pricing?).

> With Unleash set up, you can use your application to talk to Unleash through one of our SDKs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Unleash set up, you can use your application to talk to Unleash through one of our [SDKs](https://docs.getunleash.io/reference/sdks).
```

With an A/B testing strategy, you’ll be able to:

-   Determine the percentage of users exposed to the new feature
-   Determine the percentage of users that get exposed to each version of the feature

To target users accordingly, we will create an [activation strategy](/reference/activation-strategies). This Unleash concept defines who will be exposed to a particular flag or flags. Unleash comes pre-configured with multiple activation strategies that let you enable a feature only for a specified audience, depending on the parameters under which you would like to release a feature.

![Anatomy of an activation strategy](/img/anatomy-of-unleash-strategy.png)

Different strategies use different parameters. Predefined strategies are bundled with Unleash. The default strategy is the gradual rollout strategy with 100% rollout, which basically means that the feature is enabled for all users. In this tutorial, we will adjust the percentage of users who have access to the feature.

:::note
Activation strategies are defined on the server. For server-side SDKs, activation strategy implementation is done on the client side. For frontend SDKs, the feature is calculated on the server side.
:::

> On the feature flag view in Unleash, click on the ‘Add your first strategy’ button to navigate to a (default) gradual rollout strategy form.

Reviewer: You no longer need to do this, you can just enable the feature flag in the environment. But if you want still explain it the same way:

```suggestion
Open your feature flag and click **Add strategy**.
```

![Add your first strategy from the flag view in Unleash.](/img/use-case-add-new-strategy.png)

The gradual rollout strategy form has multiple fields that control the rollout of your feature. You can name the strategy something relevant to the A/B test you’re creating, but this is an optional field.

> ![In the gradual rollout form, you can configure the parameters of your A/B tests and releases.](/img/use-case-gradual-rollout.png)

Reviewer: Updated screenshot

<img width="1183" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-22 at 11 01 15" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1b13434e-c2f7-46bb-8e03-4bd5d1dd2f12">

Using strategy variants in your activation strategy is the canonical way to run A/B tests with Unleash and your application.

![This diagram breaks down how strategy variants sit on top activation strategies for flags in Unleash.](/img/tutorial-building-blocks-strategy-variants.png)

A variant has four components that define it:

-   **a name**: This must be unique among the strategy's variants. When working with a feature with variants in a client, you will typically use the variant's name to find out which variant it is.
-   **a weight**: The weight is the likelihood of any one user getting this specific variant. See the [weights section](/reference/strategy-variants#variant-weight) for more info.
-   **an optional payload**: A variant can also have an associated payload. Use this to deliver more data or context. See the [payload section](/reference/strategy-variants#variant-payload) for more details.
-   **a value**

> While teams may have different goals for measuring performance, Unleash enables you to configure strategy variants within your application/service and the platform.

Author: Removing since I make it clear strategy variants are useful for a/b testing and set up in unleash earlier.

![You can review the anatomy of an Unleash strategy variants in relation to other Unleash features.](/img/anatomy-of-unleash-variants.png)

In your gradual rollout form, there is a ‘Variants’ section. Click on the ‘Add variant’ button. A form will appear where you can provide a unique name for the variant. For the purpose of this tutorial, we’ve created 2 variants shown in the image below: `variantA` and `variantB`. In a real world use case, we recommend more specific names to be comprehensible and relevant to the versions of the feature you’re referencing. Create additional variants if you need to test more versions.

Next, decide on the percentage of users that will be targeted for each variant, which is known as the _variant weight_. By default, 50% of users will be targeted between 2 variants. For example, 50% users within the 35% of users targeted from the rollout percentage you defined earlier would experience `variantA`. Switch on the ‘Custom percentage’ toggle to change the default of the variant weights.

![You can configure multiple strategy variants for A/B testing within the gradual rollout form.](/img/use-case-variants.png)

> To learn more, read our documentation on [strategy variants](/reference/strategy-variants).

Reviewer: Docs linked at first mention of strategy variants already, so I think we can skip this sentence to keep the tutorial focused. 
```suggestion
```

For example, user `uuid1234` should be the target of `variantA` regardless of their session. The original subset of users that get `variantA` will continue to experience that variation of the feature over time. At Unleash, we call this [stickiness](/reference/stickiness). You can define the parameter of stickiness in the gradual rollout form. By default, stickiness is calculated by `sessionId` and `groupId`.

### Track A/B Testing for your Key Performance Metrics

An A/B testing strategy is most useful when you can track the results of a feature rollout to users. When your team has clearly defined the goals for your A/B tests, you can use Unleash to analyze how results tie back to key metrics, like conversion rates or time spent on a page. One way to collect this data is through enabling impression data per feature flag. [Impression data](/reference/impression-data) contains information about a specific feature flag activation check.

To enable impression data for your rollout, navigate to your feature flag form and turn the toggle on.

> ![Enable impression data in the strategy rollout form for your flag.](/img/enable-impression-data.png)

Reviewer: Updated screenshot

<img width="1155" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-22 at 11 05 54" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/050ecd42-c263-4ee4-9133-237523e0cdbf">

![This is a graph comparing traditional A/B testing and multi-arm bandit selection.](/img/use-case-abvbandit.png)

> [Image Source: Matt Gershoff](https://blog.conductrics.com/balancing-earning-with-learning-bandits-and-adaptive-optimization/)

To use Unleash to conduct a multi-arm bandit test, you will need to:

-   collect the necessary data from each variant’s performance by enabling impression data for your feature flag
-   capture impression events in your application code
-   funnel the impression events captured from your application code to an external analytics tool
-   create signal endpoint(s) in Unleash that will point to your external analytics tools
-   create actions in Unleash that will react to your signals that were integrated

> This approach minimizes the "regret" associated with allocating traffic to lower performing variants. Multi-arm bandit tests using Unleash can adapt to changing conditions, such as seasonal fluctuations or user behavior changes. In some cases, they can be used to ensure that users are not exposed to suboptimal experiences for extended periods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach minimizes the risk of allocating traffic to lower-performing variants. Multi-arm bandit tests using Unleash can adapt to changing conditions, such as seasonal fluctuations or user behavior changes. In some cases, they can be used to ensure that users are not exposed to suboptimal experiences for extended periods.
```

> This approach minimizes the "regret" associated with allocating traffic to lower performing variants. Multi-arm bandit tests using Unleash can adapt to changing conditions, such as seasonal fluctuations or user behavior changes. In some cases, they can be used to ensure that users are not exposed to suboptimal experiences for extended periods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach minimizes the "regret" associated with allocating traffic to lower-performing variants. Multi-arm bandit tests using Unleash can adapt to changing conditions, such as seasonal fluctuations or user behavior changes. In some cases, they can be used to ensure that users are not exposed to suboptimal experiences for extended periods.
```
